# Citybike_Rides_and_Riders
Module 18 tableau project summarizing citybike data for city officials.

The tableau visualizations are available at https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/rjg.neu.  A separate email account was created just for this project, and used for the tableau login, for privacy reasons.

This project uses Tableau and data published by city officials to answer the officials' questions about the uses of the citybike program so that they can better publicize and improve the program.   Data has been collected on the largest ride sharing program in the US since 2013, but the officials have not had tools to analyze the data in an ongoing fashion.

The raw data is publically available on a city website, https://citibikenyc.com/system-data, organized by month, and divided into Jersey City and New York datasets.  Because the number of bikes and docking stations, and the number of riders has expanded exponentially since the program began In 2013, and electric bikes have been added, it seemed that using older data to help city officials plan for the future would not be productive, so only the last three years were examined, 2020 to 2023.   Currently, there are more than 1 million rides per month in New York in the summer, with more than 26,000 bikes in service.

Additionally, in February of 2020, the format of the data changed so that the published data no longer has individual information such as bike id, rider's birth year, and gender that was available in the earlier datasets.  Thus, while all data for the last three years was downloaded and examined, as recommended in the project instructions, originally the intention was to begin the report in February 2020.  Combined files were created for the calendar year, keeping New Jersey and New York data separate, although many citibikes checked out in New Jersey ride into Manhattan and Long Island on a daily basis.

In all formats, each data row contains latitude and longitude information about one particular ride, starting and ending station names, information about the type of bike - electric or classic -  and information about whether a rider was a member of the program or a casual rider renting for the day.  

The data was cleaned to remove start and end station ids, which mirrored start and end station names, and to eliminate all blank station names.   A blank end station name appears to occur when someone checks out a bike and then leaves it without docking, as the ending location is documented and the location where the bike was recovered is known.  Blank start station names appear to occur when someone finds a bike, rides it, and then leaves it docked.  In one case, a bike was found in the Hudson River, near a pier.  Although the reports do not show this because the data have been cleaned, it appears that approximately three percent of the total rides have blank start or end stations.

Data was also aggregated before loading into tableau, to sum counts by start and end station names, and by station name, bike type, and member type.   Data combination, cleaning, and aggragation was done using several tools:  Excel, Python and Jupyter Notebook, and a trial version of Tableau Prep, which allows scripting of data combination, cleaning, and aggragation so that it can be re=run as new data is accquired.  

While the combined data files fit within Tableau's published size limitations, the online performance was sometimes slow, and for both NYC and JC data, intermittently in the last days of the project, Tableau would report that it needed extracts of the files, which would automatically pull in the data a section at a time, but then generated errors in creating the extracts, so that the trends for the first six months of 2023 are displayed for Jersy City data, and for New York, the aggregated data is displayed for fiscal year 2022-2023.   

The non-aggrregated data includes a start and end station and start and end ride time for each ride, which allows calculating and displaying the distance covered and the time taken for each ride.   All aggregation looses this information, so the ride route maps were kept for Jersey City but not used for New York.   During development, the same ride route maps were generated for New York, but the non-aggregated data has so many data points performance even using only June 2023 data was too slow, so those maps are not included in the final report.  In any case, the ride data is so dense for Manhattan, and so many stations have one ride each in any given month, that individual ride visualizations are not very helpful.  

The city officials had numerous questions about bike usage, many of which involved data that is no longer being collected, such as bikes which traveled the most and were most likely to need repairs.  The report presented summarizes metrics about station use, whether an electric bike was used, and whether the user was a member or a casual rider, which can help officials plan for new docking stations, moving stations, or re-alloating the types of bikes purchased.  

The analysis conducted also compared NYC rider use with rider use for bikes docked in Jersey City.  While there is a great deal of crossover of individual bikes into New York, the two sets of riders share very different patterns.  Any differences in ridership were not part of the originally-asked questions, but the project requested interesting observations made during the study.

Another of the project requirements was to consider the look of the citibike program in designing the report.  An eyedropper program, available at https://citibikenyc.com/system-data, was used to try to match citibike's very iconic colors of dark royal blue, light and dark teal, and a maroon/red color, with blake for some bike components and in the logo.   The summary attempted to adopt citibike's clean, minimalist style, with fewer visualizations on a single dashboard, and its font style.